[AUDIO LOGO]
>>MICHAEL LICHENS:
Best way to describe
the angelic realm is
they are ones that exist
outside of time and space.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Are they
testing us for some reason?
>>LICHENS: They are.
Especially, Saint Paul has
this reminder to everyone
to entertain strangers
because sometimes people
entertain angels unaware.
One of the great things
about guardian angels
is it shows we're not alone.
We're not just left
here to exist and die.
>>NOORY: What's an archangel?
>>LICHENS: They oversee
specifically God's realm
and protect it.
A lot of people, when
they encounter angels,
especially when the angels
appear in their full glory,
are immediately afraid.
>>NOORY: Do they have
messages for us, Michael?
>>LICHENS: They do.
>>NOORY: What might they be?
>>LICHENS: Of course, repent.
Flee from your sins,
but also return to God.
They're asking you to come back.
>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>NOORY: Welcome
to Beyond Belief.
Michael J. Lichens with us, a
mysticism researcher with an MA
degree from the University
of Chicago Divinity School.
Michael's work focuses on
the very overlooked aspects
of spiritual life.
Michael, welcome
back to the program.
>>LICHENS: Thank you so much
for having me again, George.
>>NOORY: You did a great job
on Coast to Coast for us,
by the way.
>>LICHENS: Thank you.
>>NOORY: I'm still getting
emails from people.
>>LICHENS: Being on that show
was like a dream come true.
I was one of those nerdy kids
who loved Art Bell, growing up.
And when you took over-- so
it's been a dream come true.
I'm glad it went well.
>>NOORY: How did
you get involved
in the aspect of mysticism?
>>LICHENS: I got involved--
pretty much from
an early age, I was
raised in an
evangelical household
with a very Irish Catholic--
American Irish Catholic grandma.
>>NOORY: Strict?
>>LICHENS: Yes.
So she would take me
to mass all the time.
And I loved-- I adored
her, so I, of course,
wanted to learn about
her spirituality.
And that whole side of the
family, one of her daughters,
my aunt, has psychic powers
and things of that nature.
So almost immediately,
from the time
I could talk and
ask questions, I
wanted to know more about that.
And then my career in
academia and editing
just kept going
in that direction.
>>NOORY: Now one of the great
aspects of mysticism is angels.
>>LICHENS: Yes.
>>NOORY: And the angelic
realm is fascinating.
What is it?
>>LICHENS: Best way to
describe the angelic realm
is they're still creatures much
like us, created by a creator,
but they are ones that exist
outside of time and space.
So they're not bound like we are
by the laws of physics or time
or things of that nature.
But they exist in this
eternal communion with God.
Unless they're
the fallen angels,
that they exist in eternal
communion outside of God.
And that is where they
exist for all of eternity,
having no place in
physics or time.
>>NOORY: Why did they
fall, some of them?
>>LICHENS: Some of them fell,
according to scriptures,
because Lucifer became
jealous of us humans.
>>NOORY: He was an angel.
>>LICHENS: He was one
of the highest angels.
And his very name means light.
And he was thought to be one
of the more beautiful ones.
He after-- according
to scripture,
after humans were
created and we were
endowed with a physical soul
and creating God's image,
jealousy overtook him.
And he and one-third
of the angels
rebelled against God before
being cast into hell.
>>NOORY: Now,
because it was God,
I have this feeling that
he allowed this to happen.
>>LICHENS: He allowed
them to happen
because one of the
great constants of God
in most Western religions
is that he allows
our free will to go about.
And even angels have free will.
It's different from
us because once they
make a decision, due to
their eternal nature,
it's an eternal decision.
But he allowed it to happen.
And this also
allowed, say, Michael,
who we'll be
talking about today,
to show his warrior spirit
and cast Lucifer down
into the Earth.
>>NOORY: Can we see
angels, Michael?
>>LICHENS: If they want us to
see them, we absolutely can.
And they do often
show themselves to us.
>>NOORY: So they walk among us?
>>LICHENS: They
can walk among us.
Scripture and
mystics have reported
that they will sometimes
appear as just regular humans--
the beggar, the
guy who's knocking
on your door asking for food.
So they can appear human.
They can also sometimes
appear in their actual form,
which is terrifying.
>>NOORY: Are they testing
us for some reason?
>>LICHENS: They are.
Especially Saint Paul has
this reminder to everyone
to entertain strangers
because sometimes people
entertain angels unaware.
And that's a calling to
the ancient Christian idea
of hospitality that we give
to people as much as we can.
And so we do that knowing
that they're strangers,
but they very well
might be angels.
>>NOORY: They say we're all
assigned a guardian angel.
>>LICHENS: Yes.
>>NOORY: Is that true?
>>LICHENS: We are all,
each and every one
of us, assigned a guardian
angel, absolutely.
>>NOORY: Now, does the
guardian angel have any
say so with the matter?
>>LICHENS: [LAUGHS] I
don't know specifically
if it's like the job
posting, but they still
have their free will to do
the will of God, so yeah,
they do have the say in us.
But I don't know if they have
a say in each specific person.
>>NOORY: Do we each
have one guardian angel?
>>LICHENS: We each have
one guardian angel,
but sometimes other angels
can take an interest in us.
In the Old Testament,
there was this story
of Tobit, who Raphael,
the archangel,
had befriended him while
disguised as a human.
>>NOORY: Tell me
some stories that you
may have heard about people
dealing with their guardian
angels.
>>LICHENS: Absolutely.
So one of my absolute
favorites is Padre Pio, who--
Christian mystic extraordinaire
of the 20th century.
>>NOORY: He had the stigmata.
>>LICHENS: He had the stigmata.
He would also get the other
wounds of Christ on him.
>>NOORY: Yes, exactly.
>>LICHENS: He would
frequently talk not just
to his own guardian
angel, he could
commune with other guardian
angels for other people.
And whenever anyone asked
him for prayer requests,
he would often say just
tell your guardian angel
to tell mine.
And they will tell me.
>>NOORY: And they'll
take care of it.
>>LICHENS: Yeah.
And this was proven to him
when a pilgrim was coming
to see him, and their bus had--
their breaks went
out on their bus
and they were in an accident.
>>NOORY: Oh, jeez.
>>LICHENS: So this woman just
prayed to her guardian angel,
protect me and let Padre
Pio know that I'm coming,
but I need help.
And the moment she arrived,
a few minutes later,
Padre Pio immediately
comes over to her
and says your guardian
angel came to me
and told me you
were needing prayer.
Were you in an accident?
And this happened constantly
in the confessional,
where before people
could talk, he'd
say your angel already spoke
to me or something like that.
>>NOORY: I had a call on Coast
to Coast several years ago
during my open line section.
And the lady was telling me
about her guardian angel.
And she was in a
car with her husband
and they were weaving
in and out of traffic,
and it was nighttime.
And they pulled to the
left to pass a truck.
And as they did, guess what,
a car was coming right at them
from the other side--
>>LICHENS: Oh, my gosh.
>>NOORY: --right at them.
And she's praying, oh,
God, please, help me.
Oh, God please help me.
And I guess when you pray
to God, he sends the angels.
She said at that moment,
when she started praying,
the two cars merged and went
through each other, almost like
ghosts.
>>LICHENS: Oh, my.
>>NOORY: And one car
went the other way
and they went their way,
and nobody got hurt.
How does that happen?
>>LICHENS: Couldn't
tell you the exact,
but it's the miracles
they can work.
Again, they're not bound
by physics like we are.
They don't-- they can change
their appearance if they need
to.
They can move things
and move through time.
I've never heard of something
quite that extraordinary.
>>NOORY: It's amazing.
>>LICHENS: Oh, the heart attack.
I am sure that when he--
I bet that person never asks
when does God answer prayers.
>>NOORY: Favorite movie,
"It's a Wonderful Life
with Jimmy Stewart"
>>LICHENS: Yes.
>>NOORY: And he was there,
ready to commit suicide.
He was so despondent.
And that's when they
sent the angel, Clarence,
down to save him.
And he did.
>>LICHENS: He did.
>>NOORY: So they get involved
in our life, don't they.
>>LICHENS: They did.
And what I loved about that
depiction of guardian angels,
he was responding not to just
Jimmy Stewart's character
but everyone.
The whole town was
praying for him
because they knew
he was in crisis.
So, in a way,
Clarence was an answer
to a prayer hundreds
of people were
praying, and had no idea how
their prayer would be answered.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Well, angels communicate with
people in different ways.
On Gaia's "Open
Minds," Belinda Womack
describes a way to
contact the angelic realm.
Fascinating.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> So they say it begins
by saying I need help.
And that's the first thing.
I need help and I surrender.
Those two words,
I surrender, make
it so helpful for angels
to step into our movies
and to help us to change
our reality because we
are creating our lives.
And so if we say, I
surrender and help me,
that allows these awesome,
wonderful executive producers
to step in and to
help us to change
the movie we are dreaming,
the movie we are writing.
>> Exactly.
And I am constantly
amazed throughout my life
when I say, hey, I need
some help with this one.
Or even if I don't ask,
they know me well enough
to know where I do.
And the degree of creativity
to which they solve problems
is mind-boggling
to me all the time.
It's like I could
have never come up
with that as a solution.
That is brilliant.
It's far beyond anything that
we would calculate on our own.
>> But at the same time, we're
not giving our power away.
And they really make
this is important,
that they work through us,
through the concept of oneness,
which again is
challenging for the ego
to understand because the
ego thinks, hey, I'm it.
I'm me and you're you.
And you're over there
and I'm over here.
But really, we are all one.
We are so connected.
And so when we just ask for
help and we ask for help
whatever the problem is--
and as you know,
the more we ask,
the easier it becomes
because our egos are starting
to realize there's help for me.
There's help, and the more I
ask, then that help shows up,
and then the ego begins to
be just like a scientist.
We start to see the
proof that we are helped.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: What's that old saying,
Michael, knock and the door
will open?
>>LICHENS: Yes.
From the New Testament,
Jesus says knock and the door
will open.
Ask and it will
be given unto you.
>>NOORY: Much like
what she just said.
>>LICHENS: Exactly.
And I love how she
incorporates the angels
because to paraphrase
John Paul II,
guardian angels are our
personal patron saint.
They're not just
there to protect us
from spiritual danger.
They can help us in physical
danger, but as a lot of saints,
Bernard of Clairvaux,
in particular,
noted, that he often
asked his angel
to help him with studying,
to help him with virtue,
to resist temptation because
they're there to protect us,
but their ultimate goal
is to see us through life
and the life beyond death.
>>NOORY: That little
voice, Michael, we
all hear in our head, could
that be our guardian angels?
>>LICHENS: It is often
said that our guardian
angels help us and prompt us.
Most of theologians
and exorcists
don't believe angels are
able to read our minds.
But because these
are ancient beings,
they understand human
intuition and human nature
a lot better than we
do, so it can look
like they're reading our minds.
They're not sitting there with
a transcript of what we're
thinking, but they can
influence our thinking,
our decision-making.
Most powerfully, I think
Odile Haumonté, who
is this wonderful French writer,
wrote "Encounters with Angels."
She talks about times when
she would be going down
a dark alley and would
just feel someone tug
at her shoulder or something,
say, hey let's go this way.
>>NOORY: Be careful.
Don't go there.
>>LICHENS: Exactly.
>>NOORY: I'm here
today because I
think I might have been
saved by a guardian angel.
I am approaching a
four-lane intersection
and my light is
green, so you go.
I hear a voice in my head--
maybe it's the angel--
and the voice says don't go
through the intersection.
Don't go through
the intersection.
And it was so compelling,
I had my green light,
cars are behind me, and
I stopped right there
and didn't go through.
At that moment, Michael,
had I gone through--
somebody went through
their red light
and they would
have broadsided me.
God knows what would
have happened to me.
But what was that voice that
told me not to go through?
Was it me?
Am I the intuitive one or is
it an angel tipping me off?
>>LICHENS: I think it could
be a combination of both.
I think you've been
around a while.
You definitely learned how to
listen to your inner voice,
listen to your instincts,
those things that
have kept the human race alive
for hundreds of thousands
of years.
But yeah, there are
supernatural occurrences.
One of the great things
about guardian angels
is it shows we're not alone.
We're not just left
here to exist and die.
There's something
that watches over us.
And you, George, have
a reason to live,
which is why we couldn't lose
you in that intersection.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
What's an archangel?
>>LICHENS: An archangel is
one of the higher angels.
They oversee specifically
God's realm and protect it.
They are oftentimes-- like
we get guardian angels,
guardian angels can be
assigned to countries as well.
For example, at Fatima, one of
the archangels who many believe
was also Gabriel,
identified himself
as the angel of Portugal.
Meaning that he was overseeing
the entire nation of Portugal.
>>NOORY: It was his assignment.
>>LICHENS: It was his
assignment to look over it.
And so archangels are
almost the commanders,
if you think of it, over
God's armies on Earth.
They can also-- they often play
major roles in human affairs,
most famously, Gregory
the Great Pope of Rome
in the sixth century.
A massive plague had moved
through the Mediterranean
and it was hitting
Rome really hard.
And so he prayed
and did a procession
to make the plague go away.
And one day, he and a bunch
of onlookers looked up
in what's now called
Castel Sant'Angelo--
and it was called
that because what
did they see on top
of this ancient castle
was the Archangel
Michael showing a sword
and then taking a sword and
putting it back in its sheath,
signifying to everyone that the
plague was going to be lifted.
>>NOORY: We'll talk about
Michael's sword in a moment
because that's fascinating.
So the archangels, in the
pecking order of things,
are a little higher than angels?
>>LICHENS: Yes, they are.
They're all made with the
same dignity and grace,
but they have
different assignments.
As you go further
up, they're closer
to God's throne, where
you get into the thrones,
the Dominions, the
Seraphim, and the Cherubim,
whose entire work
is surrounding God.
>>NOORY: Do they have
more angelic powers
than regular angels?
>>LICHENS: They seem
to have equal powers
and are made in equal
dignity, but they
have greater
assignments and also can
take on a more
terrifying appearance.
That's where the Old Testament
describes like the Cherubim are
six-winged, many-eyed,
and terrifying
looking from description.
>>NOORY: Can an archangel
be a guardian angel?
>>LICHENS: They've shown
up in the Old Testament.
I mentioned Tobit and Raphael.
Raphael was taking-- he
appeared as a human to Tobit
and his son, Tobias, and
was just helping them
through this period where
Tobias was looking for a wife.
And then only
towards the end, he
reveals that I'm Rafael,
one of the archangels
who surrounds God's throne.
And he was assigned,
in many ways,
it sounded like a love
story, but he was also
assigned specifically
to look after Tobit.
>>NOORY: Tell me
an archangel story.
I mean, what is their role?
>>LICHENS: Their role-- probably
the most famous when we get
around to Christmas, we'll hear
the words of the archangel to--
it was Gabriel to Mary to tell
her that she would give birth
to the son.
And that-- and he appears many
times in different connections.
He appeared, of course,
to the children of Fatima,
along with the
Archangel Michael.
And then many, many Irish
Saints, particularly off
of the coast of Ireland
at Skellig Michael,
many monks had
encountered the archangel
at that very space,
which is interesting
because there weren't a
lot of people in that area.
>>NOORY: There's a
religious song called "Ave"
and it includes cherubim.
What is a cherubim?
>>LICHENS: The cherubim are the
ones who surround God's throne.
And their job is
basically to sing
the praise and glory of God.
When they encounter
us, they're usually--
>>NOORY: Are they the little
things we see hovering around?
>>LICHENS: No, they are.
That's how a lot of artists
depict them because--
>>NOORY: Little tiny
wings and all that.
>>LICHENS: Yeah.
Little tiny winged
babies flying around.
In the Old Testament,
they sound almost
like ancient
terrors, which is why
one of my favorite things
about biblical angels
is they always start
with, be not afraid.
Do not fear us.
Which I remember
reading like, why
were people so terrified
that when you find out
the descriptions of angels
and also all that power
and light that's
suddenly in front of you,
it's easy for humans to
fall into terror of them?
But that they're-- at least
the ones sent by God are there
to help us.
>>NOORY: Do some people
fear angels, Michael?
>>LICHENS: Yes.
And I think a little
fear is healthy.
I'm not a-- I don't
think I'm going
to get attacked by
a bear every day,
but when I see a bear
in the wild, of course,
I get that internal sense
that's saying, OK, careful.
That's--
>>NOORY: Fight or flight.
>>LICHENS: Yeah.
And it's something that has
the power to swipe my head off.
Angels are far more powerful.
They have patience,
they have everything
they need to take us down.
So a lot of people, when
they encounter angels,
especially when the angels
appear in their full glory,
are immediately afraid.
I recall one patient
who encountered an angel
while his father
was on his deathbed.
And when he saw the angelic
being, his father was at peace.
He himself was
filled with terror
and he wanted to run from the
room, but also what's going on?
>>NOORY: Now you said
that Lucifer was an angel.
Was he an archangel?
>>LICHENS: He was an archangel.
So he was one of
the higher angels.
The other angels were of
various different powers.
Some think that Beelzebub
might have been a seraph.
It's hard to tell,
but he was indeed
one of the highest angels.
Like I said, his very
name means light.
So sometimes he's even
called the light bringer
in the old stories.
>>NOORY: Can you
pray to an angel?
>>LICHENS: You can
absolutely pray to an angel.
Their goal is not so
much to act as gods
but to act as intermediaries
between God and man,
or to act as messengers.
But your guardian
angel is a great person
to pray to, to say--
probably for me, what
I've learned from reading
is that the best thing you
can say to your guardian angel
is simple gratitude-- thank you.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Now on Gaia's Ascension Keepers,
our friend William Henry
discusses archangels, the
Seraphim, and Cherubim,
as you've been talking about.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> According to this system, the
Watchers are the highest angels
possible and were ruled
over by four of their own.
The great angels known as
Michael, Gabriel, Raphael,
and Ariel.
These are among the good
watchers we will discuss,
as is Metatron, who is actually
the transformed human Enoch.
The watchers are the mighty
Seraphim, the winged and fiery
serpents, as they were
known, the burning ones,
who formerly guarded
the gate to Eden.
They came from God's
throne, where they
served on God's divine council.
But they decided to leave.
They crossed a
forbidden boundary
and took on earthly bodies.
In Christian art, the Seraphim
are portrayed as sixed-winged
and covered with
feathers and eyes--
an appropriate
attribute of those who
watch or guard God's throne.
Their swirling
bodies are toroidal.
They are composed of
pure love and pure light.
In his famous vision, Isaiah
saw the Seraphim enthroned
above the Ark of the
Covenant in the Holy
of Holies of Solomon's temple.
They stood above Yahweh as
he sat on his Ark throne.
They are believed to be the
same as the Cherubim of 1
Chronicles, whose
wings were stretched
above the Ark of the Covenant.
The root of Seraphim comes
either from the Hebrew verb
seraph, to burn, or the
Hebrew noun, seraph,
meaning a fiery flying serpent.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: For so many
different cultures
have illustrated these angels
and cherubims and seraphins.
It's got to tell you
something was happening.
>>LICHENS: Absolutely.
Especially when you look into
all the Abrahamic faiths that
came from the desert, they not
only had angels, of course,
but they also would talk about
demons and other creatures
of the night.
In some ways, it
takes the terror
that we just naturally
feel as humans
in this big chaotic universe,
and they bring order to it.
They help us to see beyond just
the eat and live parts of life,
but to see that there's
something greater
and bigger than us.
>>NOORY: Are the angels
still under the realm of God?
>>LICHENS: The angels
that stayed with God
after the rebellion are
still under the realm of God.
They still operate
under God's will.
And they still seek
to enact his will.
>>NOORY: Are they the
messengers of deception
or are they the messengers
of grand things to do?
>>LICHENS: They're the
messengers of grand things
even if they don't seem so
grand in our view of things.
They are the messengers that
help the human race get back
on the right path, but
there are, of course,
the fallen angels
who can deceive us.
>>NOORY: What is the Metatron?
>>LICHENS: Metatron is the
voice of God incarnate.
So when God needed to speak
to, say, Adam and Eve,
it's thought in some mysticism
that he would send Metatron,
who would act as the voice of
God, whose very voice could
shatter a person's mind.
And so there was another
messenger between God and man.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
It is fascinating.
Is it not?
>>LICHENS: It's
very fascinating.
It's interesting because
we know that God--
in at least my
spiritual tradition,
we know God uses humans
often to fulfill his will.
It's so fascinating
to think about.
There's a realm
beyond and something
that we can't even comprehend
that's doing exactly what we're
doing.
>>NOORY: Michael, you talked
about the sword of St. Michael.
>>LICHENS: Yes.
>>NOORY: First of all,
explain St. Michael.
>>LICHENS: So Saint Michael
is probably the most famous
of archangels.
You can tell by my first
name, I really like the guy.
He is the one that
had casted Lucifer out
during the rebellion
and actually slew him
with a sword before casting
them down into the Earth.
From there, he has been known
to be a protector, a fighter.
He's the Patron Saint of
soldiers and warriors.
And he has appeared
throughout human history
in the strangest of places.
We mention Rome, to
talk about the plague.
He's also appeared to
different mystics and people
who had seen Mary.
He will often be the
forerunner before people
will have Marian
visions, basically
to let people prepare, be
ready for this to happen.
And so while he's the Warrior
Saint and the archetype
of a Christian Warrior, he's
also the messenger still.
So he still fulfills
that angelic function.
>>NOORY: There is a piece
that I run during Christmas
on the radio show, that was
done by a great broadcaster
by the name of Lee
Allen, and it is
called "A Letter to Michael."
And it depicts a soldier
writing back to his mother
about the Korean War and how he
was about ready to get killed,
when all of a sudden,
out of nowhere,
Michael appears with his
sword and protects him
from the enemy.
It's an amazing
depiction on many things
you've just illustrated.
>>LICHENS: Yeah.
And it's interesting.
A couple of soldiers have
had visions of St. Michael.
One of the most famous, there's
called the Angel of Belgium
that many soldiers
thought was Michael,
but it was during
World War I when
British had to flee Belgium
while the Germans advanced.
And at this time,
there was a lot
of crimes against humanity
happening in Belgium.
We're talking crucifixions,
deep crimes against humanity.
>>NOORY: Horrible.
>>LICHENS: And while the
soldiers were fleeing,
they weren't sure they
were going to flee in time.
Thousands-- I'm not
talking about just a couple
of dozen-- thousands
of soldiers saw
an angel appear at the German
lines holding back the Germans.
>>NOORY: It was Michael.
>>LICHENS: It was Michael.
Sword unsheathed, helping
people flee and evacuate.
>>NOORY: Is Michael
the only angel
that deals with protection?
>>LICHENS: All the angels
deal with protection.
He seems to have a
particular love of soldiers,
though, especially the
boots on the ground
that are in the field.
A couple other
encounters happened
in World War I, where
soldiers wrote back
that they saw Saint Michael
warning them to flee
or telling them to
get down minutes
before the bombs
started falling.
So he takes an interest in the
low-level soldiers, it seems.
>>NOORY: There are various areas
around the country that Michael
has been seen.
We've got a little
depiction on the spots.
He's all over the place.
>>LICHENS: He's
all over the place.
So this is what's called
the Sword of Saint Michael,
and it runs in
this straight line.
This has only been discovered
in the last 100 years
that people noticed all
these monasteries associated
with Saint Michael ran
in a straight line.
And what's even
more fascinating,
this follows the summer
equinox, so it's actually
aligning with the stars.
>>NOORY: Michael is seasonal.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LICHENS: He at least keeps
an eye on the sky for us.
And you can see that
right across the two Saint
Michael's monastery-- one in
Cornwall and one in Normandy--
those were two-plate
mountain, tidal mountains
that you can't access them
when the tide is high.
And Saint Michael
appeared on each spot,
so of course, they built a
massive monastery to him.
And as you get further down,
down there in Southern Italy
is also where Saint
Michael appeared
to a group of soldiers.
Right before the
Saracens invaded,
he basically showed
to the small village,
warned them they were
about to be invaded
and to fortify their place,
and they survived the invasion.
>>NOORY: Michael, what does
Saint Michael look like?
>>LICHENS: That's
a tough question.
Angels, they don't have
physical bodies like us,
so they can often appear as
humans however they like.
But in almost all
accounts of him,
he is shown to be a warrior with
a sword, depending on what--
>>NOORY: Is he the only
archangel that is doing that?
>>LICHENS: He's
the only archangel
I'm aware of that appears
to humans with a sword
like as if to make sure
we understand what he is.
The sword itself, what's
its reasoning behind that?
The sword is sacred
in a lot of ways
because it was the weapon
that defeated Satan.
So, in a lot of
spirituality, we like
to say that we want to
be cloaked, protected
by the sword of Saint Michael,
the one that slew demons.
And by that weapon
itself, it's taken
on a lot of meaning throughout
Christian mysticism, which
is why when he announced to
Saint Gregory the plague was
leaving, he was sheathing the
sword as if God's wrath was
suddenly going to go away.
Anytime he's depicted as holding
the sword in his hands, that
means battle is about to happen,
either spiritual or physical.
>>NOORY: Do other events
occur when Saint Michael
has been witnessed, like
natural tragedies or anything
like that?
>>LICHENS: Yeah.
I had mentioned a--
particularly invasions,
but he has often
appeared to mystics whenever
there's been a plague.
I don't know if he ever appeared
before COVID or anything
like that, but in ancient
times, many people
would see him
warning of a plague,
warning that this
was going to happen.
And that's because
in the medieval,
understanding plagues was part
of God's wrath to correct us.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
How about the other archangels?
Do they have similar traits
as Michael, or is he the one?
>>LICHENS: He's the most
popular, the most famous.
You can find authors of St.
Michael just about anywhere.
He got especially famous
in the 19th century
when Pope Leo the 13th had
a vision of St. Michael
and the devil at an argument.
And that's why he
promoted the Saint Michael
prayer, which many Catholics
remember praying after mass.
Saint Michael the Archangel,
protect us in battle,
be our defense against
the wickedness and snares
of the devil, and
that was prayed
by thousands of Catholics
every Sunday for years.
>>NOORY: Well, we've heard
depictions of Michael.
I mentioned the one in Korea.
>>LICHENS: Yes.
>>NOORY: Are there any
boundaries to this archangel?
Are there places it will not go?
>>LICHENS: As far as I'm aware,
they'll go just about anywhere,
talk to anyone.
They are bound
only by God's will.
So so long as it's not a--
I can't imagine that any of us
would have the power to keep
an angel out even
if we wanted to,
but they, of course,
do not appear in hell.
The only time a being
appeared in hell
was Christ after
his crucifixion.
But otherwise, they don't
go-- that's not their realm.
That is another realm
they do not go into.
>>NOORY: Does
Michael the archangel
appear when you ask for him
or does it appear on its own?
>>LICHENS: He will appear
completely on his own.
They are able to
act in their wills--
fulfilling God's will,
but they will often
appear when we do ask for them,
whether we can see them or not.
So I do believe that
each time every one of us
prays, say the archangel Michael
prayer, we are calling on him
and he is looking out for us.
>>NOORY: Tell us about
sacred sites, Michael.
>>LICHENS: Absolutely.
One of the most
interesting sacred sites,
especially associated
with, say, Michael,
is, for me, Skellig
Michael, which
was set up by monks on
the west side of Ireland.
If anyone remembers the
latest "Star Wars" movies,
that's where Luke
Skywalker was hanging out,
at Skellig Michael.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>LICHENS: For the
medieval person,
that was the edge of the world.
You could not go further
west if you wanted to.
So it was at the very
edge of civilization.
And it was a perfect
place for Irish monks
to set up to do
their translations,
but they had a
particular devotion
to the Archangel
Michael, who was said
to appear to the first monks.
And that is at the very tip
of the sword of Saint Michael,
running down to Jerusalem.
>>NOORY: Our colleague,
Freddy Silva,
appeared on Gaia's "Open
Minds" about these sacred sites
that apparently are awakening
humans all over the place.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> This is really
about human awakening.
All of these sites are about
awakening our own consciousness
and coming to know ourselves.
Is that correct?
>> Oh, absolutely.
If you go to any of the
temples around the world
and particularly
the ones in Egypt,
the ones in Southern India,
who are still very much intact,
they still have a lot of their
texts written on the walls--
and once we sat down to decipher
what the text is saying,
it's quite clear that all
of them are in agreement.
There's one in Temple
of Edfu, for example,
that talks about how the
temple is built to transform
the person into a god, into
a bright star, which is not
a bad reason to go there
in the first place.
And other temples talk about how
these are transmutation points
of the soul where heaven
connects with Earth, where
the temple is a kind
of living intermediary
between the physical human
and everything else that's
in the cosmos.
So in a way, it almost
reminds you that whenever
you lose the plot--
and we do this regularly
all the time these days--
the ancestors who
built these temples
left us the
instructions of where
to go, certain hot spots
on the face of the Earth,
where we can go
and basically tune
into the rest of the
universe and find out
how things really are.
Get to know ourselves, get to
know the purpose of our soul.
And by doing that in this kind
of quasi-shamanic environment,
then you are able
to more or less live
your life with a certain
degree of self-empowerment.
And when you have that degree
of self-awareness in your life,
no one or anything can
tell you what to do,
which is not a bad
way to live your life.
>> No, it's not.
And that has been dampened,
some can say, by intent.
It's not an accident
that these edifices
have been destroyed over
the last few thousand years,
in particular.
And there has been
a great detriment,
but the reality is, as
we're going to get into,
these places are
built on sacred spots
that even if the dwelling
should fall down,
if you knew where to go, they
have the same effect on us,
right?
>> Absolutely.
I mean, they're all
harnessed with natural laws.
And today, we have the
mechanism to understand what
the natural laws
they were harnessing.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Michael, do all
religions deal with angels?
>>LICHENS: The
Abrahamic faiths do.
When you get into
other religions,
you'll have intermediaries,
messengers that look--
from my very layman
understanding,
sound like angels to me.
Hermes is a good example.
He's the God that talks to the
other gods on behalf of us.
It starts to sound very angelic
when you get down to it.
And of many places
where Saint Michael
had sacred sites
built to him, were
previously temples to Apollo.
So it's almost as if he
came through and revealed,
I'm the actual Apollo, but we're
still building on his temple.
It was a sacred site
before Christianity.
Long after Christianity,
would probably
continue to be a sacred site.
>>NOORY: Are these sites
dedicated to anything specific?
>>LICHENS: Usually,
an appearance
or an event that
happened, many pilgrims go
to Fatima or Lourdes
because that's
where the Virgin Mary and
other characters appeared.
>>NOORY: Appeared, yeah.
And Lourdes is a fascinating
place all by itself, isn't it?
>>LICHENS: People still--
I have a friend of mine--
I get goosebumps
when I think of him.
He was the father of
my friend, Danny--
went to Lourdes
after dealing with--
trying to remember-- I
believe it was colon cancer.
>>NOORY: Oh, God.
>>LICHENS: But healed.
He's still alive with us.
>>NOORY: Healed?
Did he jump in the water?
>>LICHENS: He did
bathe in the water
and he also attended mass
and did some fasting.
He wasn't sure anything would
happen, but weeks later,
the doctor is like
everything's in remission.
You're fine.
>>NOORY: How do you feel about
people who do not believe?
They don't believe in angels.
They don't believe
in a higher power.
It's their prerogative.
>>LICHENS: Yeah.
And--
>>NOORY: But what do you think?
What are they missing
in their life?
>>LICHENS: Oh, I think
some skepticism is always
a little healthy, but I
think with a lot of people,
it's because it's hard to
get outside of the hustle
and bustle of every day.
We have-- our lives
are determined
by the clock and the people
who are running the clock,
so it's easy to get
caught up in the imminent
without thinking
about the mystical
because we live and die by it.
And what I often want
to stress to people
is I don't believe in
angels or the greater powers
because I want a child's story.
It's because I want to know--
I know in my deepest heart
that there is something bigger
than us.
>>NOORY: There's
something there.
There's no doubt about it.
Do you find the
angels appear more
during years and
moments of strife?
>>LICHENS: Based off the history
and especially the mysticism,
like the hundreds
of encounters people
had with angels and
also Saints and ghosts
during World War I is insane.
The Guardian ran a
piece about how many
people encountered
ghosts or angels
during the Western Front.
And you think yeah,
that's probably
the time we need them the
most, when we can't rely just
on our own understanding.
We really need them.
And I think that's when
they deliver greatly.
>>NOORY: What does prayer
mean to you, Michael?
>>LICHENS: Prayer to me is
communication but more than
that, it's opening yourself
up to God in his will,
to say to him whatever it is
you need of me, whatever it is
you want of me, I want to do it
even if I can't see the bigger
picture because you can
see the bigger picture.
And that's what I
want to be part of.
And so when we pray to
God or even ask his angels
for assistance, we're
opening ourselves
up to a lot more possibility.
>>NOORY: Have you ever
had an angelic experience?
>>LICHENS: I have not.
My grandmother did.
My grandmother
swears up and down
that she was saved from
walking into oncoming traffic
by an angel because
she thought--
>>NOORY: Pushed her aside.
>>LICHENS: Grabbed her
shoulders, pulled her back,
and there was no one around her.
>>NOORY: But she felt that.
She felt that.
>>LICHENS: She
looked behind herself
to say thank you, I
really appreciate it,
and there was no
one there to thank.
So she had to
instead say thank you
in prayer, which was one
of the things she taught
me, was always be thankful
for your guardian angel
because you don't know how
many times they saved you.
>>NOORY: Are the angels
working on their own?
>>LICHENS: They can--
>>NOORY: Or is it
all through God?
>>LICHENS: It's all through God.
They do have some
free will, but they
are working through God's
will and will generally not go
against his will.
>>NOORY: I keep thinking
of that Nicolas Cage
movie, "City of Angels."
>>LICHENS: I love that movie.
And that depicts him as a
human being but an angel.
>>NOORY: Are they really
out there like that?
>>LICHENS: That's an
interesting depiction of angels.
What I liked about it was
that the angels had no more
understanding of
God than we did,
but they were still
fulfilling God's will.
I don't have any--
it's a great artistic
device, but I
don't know of any
mystic who has ever
said that angels are just
wandering the library,
asking the same questions.
>>NOORY: We heard stories
about Saint Michael
getting involved in events.
How often is that happening?
>>LICHENS: It's hard to
tell because many times, I--
many times, angels can
appear to us completely
and we're completely unaware.
Saints, going back
to the Old Testament,
have talked about they had
no idea they encountered
an angel until much later.
So who knows how often?
There's a good
chance that somebody
who gave you helpful advice
or lifted your spirits one day
was just an angel in disguise.
>>NOORY: Do they have
messages for us, Michael?
>>LICHENS: They do.
>>NOORY: What might they be?
>>LICHENS: The
messages are often--
depending on the
person and place,
they are often a similar
message which is, of course,
repent, flee from your sins,
but also return to God.
They're asking you to come
back because many of us
need that wake-up call
often in our lives.
Their messages are also of
hope that this life, whatever
travails we're having, whatever
world wars, diseases, famines,
there is still hope for us.
And again, their very existence
shows we're not left alone.
We're not an accident.
We are here for a purpose.
>>NOORY: Can you
channel an angel?
>>LICHENS: I don't know.
Many people have tried.
I don't know of any
successful ones.
I don't want to be
too close-minded,
but angels will often
talk through people,
deliver messages for others.
Padre Pio would often tell
people what their guardian
angel was trying to
tell them, but they just
couldn't hear, for
whatever reason.
And he received those
messages frequently.
>>NOORY: Who is Theo?
>>LICHENS: Theo is the
name of God in Latin.
>>NOORY: And there's also a
collectiveness of archangels
under that umbrella.
>>LICHENS: And they are--
that is the higher angels,
what we were talking
about in a previous video.
Those are the Thrones, the
Watchers, you might call them,
who are overseeing--
they are closest to God.
They literally surround
him at all times,
so they know God
better than any of us.
>>NOORY: Sheila
Gillette channels Theo.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> So are you ready to say
goodbye to us and let Theo come
through?
>> Yes.
>> OK, I'll see you later.
OK, here we go.
>> It is that beginning.
Is it now?
>> It is.
Welcome, Theo.
>> We are appreciative of the
opportunity to be of service
unto you.
You may ask.
>> Well, Theo, we would like
to open it up for you to choose
who you wish to
speak to unless--
well, you know what,
first, why don't you
give us your perspective
on soul integration?
We just heard a little bit
from Marcus and Sheila on that.
And just introduce the
subject a bit to our viewers
before we go to the questions.
>> Soul integration is
coming into the wholeness
of your being, the recognition
of the divine essence that you
are, the master that you are.
This fifth dimensionary energy
is fully about the planet now.
Never before have
human beings been
available to recognize
their masterhood.
The fifth dimensionary energy
is a place of refined vibration
that allows each
individual to recognize
the divine essence,
the master, and express
that in their daily life.
The third dimension
being physical reality.
The fourth was the
spiritual awakening.
And now as science
speaks about as well
is the fifth-dimensional
waves if you would,
on a higher frequency
level of recognition.
So it is a release of
beliefs of old paradigms that
no longer work any longer, that
allows for this transmutation,
if you would, this homecoming
into the alignment of wholeness
or holiness, divinity
expressed fully,
unencumbered from the past.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: What do you
think of Sheila Gillette?
>>LICHENS: That's fascinating.
I knew of several Renaissance
and medieval people
who tried to channel angels.
I didn't know it was still
happening in modern times.
It's fascinating.
>>NOORY: You sound like
you might have the ability
to do it yourself.
>>LICHENS: I don't think so.
My family has many
weird abilities when
observing and seeing ghosts.
I have not seen an angel,
though, or encountered one.
>>NOORY: Do you want to?
>>LICHENS: I do, but--
I do and I don't.
I do, on the one
hand, because I would
love to have that
affirmation and just
that proof for my own eyes.
On the other hand, I don't want
to see an angel because they
often have to give you work.
They often are
assigning you something.
And all I could think is if
an angel is coming to me,
they're really desperate.
>>NOORY: I'll tell you
an interesting story.
My mother was raised
in the Boston area.
And her parents owned a
series of apartment complexes
over a furniture
store that they owned.
And they had four apartments all
adjoining that they lived in.
And we'd go there every summer.
Well, one night, we got woken
up by a fireman with a mask
on at like 3:00 in the morning,
smoke engulfing the apartment.
And he woke everybody
up and got us all out.
There was a picture of me in
the "Fitchburg Massachusetts
Gazette" running across the
street in my little pajamas.
I must have been seven
or eight years old.
But this angel, whatever it
might have been, saved us.
Well, my father went up
to the fire department
after the fact because smoke
was billowing outside, and said,
we want to thank that
fireman who was in there.
And they said we haven't
gotten in there yet.
Who was he?
>>LICHENS: That's intense.
I can't believe I'm returning
to his name for this story,
but Saint Michael is the
patron of firefighters.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>LICHENS: He is.
A lot of firefighters,
especially in the Boston area,
will wear a Saint Michael's
medallion on them.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>LICHENS: So he's--
>>NOORY: I'm convinced it
was an angel that saved us.
>>LICHENS: I am
too if I'm honest.
>>NOORY: Because they said
they never went up there.
They hadn't been up
there at that point.
>>LICHENS: So an
angel was looking out
for you and your
family, and they did it
as they often do, in disguise,
because they don't necessarily
need our gratitude,
but that's insane.
>>NOORY: Michael,
give out your website.
>>LICHENS: You can
find me at mlichens--
looks like mlichens-- .com.
>>NOORY: Michael, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>LICHENS: Thank you, George.
This was a joy to share.
>>NOORY: The man upstairs sends
angels down to protect us.
Thank God he
continues to do that.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."